First-MVC series: Model & DB tutorials: Readability, MT, fix all issues (#21521)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/tutorials/first-mvc-app/working-with-sql.md

---
title: Part 5, work with a database in an ASP.NET Core MVC app
author: rick-anderson
description: Part 5 of tutorial series on ASP.NET Core MVC.
ms.author: riande
ms.date: 02/16/2020
no-loc: [appsettings.json, "ASP.NET Core Identity", cookie, Cookie, Blazor, "Blazor Server", "Blazor WebAssembly", "Identity", "Let's Encrypt", Razor, SignalR]
uid: tutorials/first-mvc-app/working-with-sql
---

# Part 5, work with a database in an ASP.NET Core MVC app

::: moniker range=">= aspnetcore-3.0"

The `MvcMovieContext` object handles the tasks of:

* Connecting to the database.
* Mapping `Movie` objects to database records.

> The database context is registered with the [Dependency Injection](xref:fundamentals/dependency-injection) container in the `ConfigureServices` method in the *Startup.cs* file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The database context is registered with the [Dependency Injection](xref:fundamentals/dependency-injection) container in the `ConfigureServices` method of the *Startup.cs* file:
```

---
title: Part 5, work with a database in an ASP.NET Core MVC app
author: rick-anderson
description: Part 5, add a model to an ASP.NET Core MVC app
description: Part 5 of tutorial series on ASP.NET Core MVC.
ms.author: riande
ms.date: 11/10/2020
ms.date: 02/16/2020
no-loc: [appsettings.json, "ASP.NET Core Identity", cookie, Cookie, Blazor, "Blazor Server", "Blazor WebAssembly", "Identity", "Let's Encrypt", Razor, SignalR]
uid: tutorials/first-mvc-app/working-with-sql
---

# Part 5, work with a database in an ASP.NET Core MVC app

::: moniker range=">= aspnetcore-3.0"

By [Rick Anderson](https://twitter.com/RickAndMSFT)
The `MvcMovieContext` object handles the tasks of:

> The `MvcMovieContext` object handles the task of connecting to the database and mapping `Movie` objects to database records. The database context is registered with the [Dependency Injection](xref:fundamentals/dependency-injection) container in the `ConfigureServices` method in the *Startup.cs* file:

Reviewer: original flows better

# [Visual Studio](#tab/visual-studio)

[!code-csharp[](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie3/Startup.cs?name=snippet_ConfigureServices&highlight=5-6)]

The ASP.NET Core [Configuration](xref:fundamentals/configuration/index) system reads the `ConnectionString` key. For local development, it gets the connection string from the *appsettings.json* file:

[!code-json[](start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie/appsettings.json?highlight=2&range=8-10)]

> In the preceding connection string example, `Server=(localdb)` prompts the necessary SQL Server Express LocalDB infrastructure to be created and started automatically.  SQL Server Express LocalDB is installed with Visual Studio by default.

Reviewer: removed this. The connection string doesn't do any of that. It's explained below.

---

When the app is deployed to a test or production server, an environment variable can be used to set the connection string to a production SQL Server. For more information, see [Configuration](xref:fundamentals/configuration/index) for more information.

# [Visual Studio](#tab/visual-studio)

## SQL Server Express LocalDB

LocalDB:

* Is a lightweight version of the SQL Server Express Database Engine.
* Targeted for program development.
* Starts on demand and runs in user mode, so there's no complex configuration.

> * By default creates *.mdf* assets in the *C:/Users/{user}* directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* By default creates *.mdf* files in the *C:/Users/{user}* directory.
```

Author: I had a note that either you or Scott suggested we use "assets" when referring to files in this way earlier.  I scratch the note.

---

> When the app is deployed to a test or production server, an environment variable can be used to set the connection string to a production SQL Server. For more information, see [Configuration](xref:fundamentals/configuration/index) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the app is deployed to a test or production server, an environment variable can be used to set the connection string to a production SQL Server. For more information, see [Configuration](xref:fundamentals/configuration/index).
```

# [Visual Studio](#tab/visual-studio)

## SQL Server Express LocalDB

LocalDB:

* Is a lightweight version of the SQL Server Express Database Engine, installed by default with Visual Studio.
* Targeted for program development.

> * Starts on demand by using a connection string, and runs in user mode, so there's no complex configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Starts on demand by using a connection string.
* Runs in user mode, so there's no complex configuration.
```

[!code-csharp[](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie3/Models/SeedData.cs?name=snippet_1)]

If there are any movies in the DB, the seed initializer returns and no movies are added.
If there are any movies in the database, the seed initializer returns and no movies are added.

```csharp
if (context.Movie.Any())
{

>     return;   // DB has been seeded.

Reviewer: Revert, comment helpful.

[!code-csharp[](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie3/Program.cs)]

Test the app.

# [Visual Studio](#tab/visual-studio)

> Delete all the records in the database by deleting links in the browser, or from SSOX.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Delete all the records in the database. The data can be deleted by one of the following approaches:
  * Selecting all the `Delete` links in the browser.
  * Selecting the database in SQL Server Object Explorer and ...
```

> Force the app to initialize, calling the methods in the `Startup` class, so the seed method runs. To force initialization, IIS Express must be stopped and restarted. Stop and restart IIS Express with any of the following approaches:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Force the app to initialize so that `Program.Main` is called. `Main` calls `SeedData.Initialize`, which initializes the database with data. To force initialization, IIS Express must be stopped and restarted. Stop and restart IIS Express with any of the following approaches:
```

* Right-click the IIS Express system tray icon in the notification area and tap **Exit** or **Stop Site**

  ![IIS Express system tray icon](working-with-sql/_static/iisExIcon.png)

  ![Contextual menu](working-with-sql/_static/stopIIS.png)

* If running VS in non-debug mode, press F5 to run in debug mode.
* If running VS in debug mode, stop the debugger and press F5.

# [Visual Studio Code / Visual Studio for Mac](#tab/visual-studio-code+visual-studio-mac)

> Delete all the records in the database, so the seed method is able to run. Stop and start the app to seed the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Delete all the records in the database. Stop and start the app  so the `SeedData.Initialize` method runs and seeds the database.
```

[!code-csharp[](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie3/Program.cs)]

Test the app.

# [Visual Studio](#tab/visual-studio)

Delete all the records in the database. The data can be deleted by one of the following approaches:

* Selecting all the `Delete` links in the browser.

> * Selecting the database in SQL Server Object Explorer and ...

Reviewer: This is all wrong. Selecting SSOX has nothing to do with init. Revert with minor cleanup. We don't use ellipsis this way.
